At breakfast, M shared with me he exited the vulnerable emotions group yesterday, walked straight to his room, turned the shower on and lay down in the shower and tried for many minutes to let the water wash away his urge to suicide.
Jesus wept.

A day of breakthrough. Many unanswered questions followed me to the morning’s first group session titled: Understanding Grief and Loss.
As I stood outside the Unit 2 group room, I had no inclination of what was to come deep inside me.

As soon as the group began and people started to detail their experience of grief and loss, I moved from my head to my heart, actually deep into my soul.
The facilitator had a much more genuine and real manner than the other hospital facilitators, and was not afraid to open herself up and use personal examples from her real life.
The pain in everybody’s experience was overwhelming and there was a consensus on the major role grief had played in the manifestation and development of our mental illnesses.
Scratch the mental illness and grief, and loss is not too far below the surface.
Two people spoke of the crushing, ricocheting loss of their mothers when they were young.
Neither could just simply move on, as they were told to do by those uncomfortable by their grief.
They remain defined and even tortured by the loss of their mothers.
Both said they are captured with the fear they will soon lose another cherished one who will be too ripped from their lives.
At this, my soul spoke that this is indeed what happened to me.
My eyes filled with water and my body began to heave. Would I need to leave the room?
The facilitator then asked if everyone in the group was OK.

“No,” I sobbed. “I’m sorry. And I know I shouldn’t say sorry.
It’s just that what you are talking about is exactly what happened to me: eight deaths one after the other, in less than 10 years.
Some were old and expected and others were cruelly and untimely ripped.”

Here, the sobs stifled my words. A pause. And then I felt a great wave of empathy around the room.
And after a minute or so, I collected myself and offered that I’ve learnt to be thankful for every breath (some in the group aren’t),
and to not take anyone for granted, and be thankful for everyone dear because at any moment they or we could be gone.
This was easily the best group I’ve done inside the clinic.

Out of hospital. Feel so desolate. Confused. Stateless. Anchorless.
As if my very being, my very soul, my very mind had been cut adrift.
Hard to concentrate. Hard to make any sense of the outside world.
The pain of separation from the hospital cocoon. My people.
I want to be back in their embrace. At least this time I won’t have to work tomorrow.
But instead tonight I will see my friend commissioned as a minister in a new congregation.
I know it will be painful to be among so many people who have no idea what I’ve just been through, nor see the lostness in my eyes.
Maybe they will. How can I make this about my friend? It is probably time I prayed for some help outside my own failing being.
My chest has gone out in sympathy with acid reflux.